So we talked about states, and
now we're going to move into
something a little bit different.
So these next two sections are getting
into more advanced CSS animations.
These are things that you might
not use too frequently, but
it's also very,
very useful to know regardless.
So the first one is layout animations.
And so a layout animation is actually
one of those things that we talked about
at the beginning where
you want to avoid doing.
Remember we want to avoid doing things
that are going to do what's called
triggering layouts.
And so this means avoiding manipulating
height, width, margin, padding,
border, things like that, and
only using transform and opacity.
But sometimes we actually do wanna do
animations where we do change the width or
we change the height.
So how exactly do we do this?
There's something called called the FLIP
technique that helps us with this.
And so, let me just search this there.
It's a pretty old technique.
And it was first introduced
by Paul Lewis at Google, and
this is all the way back in 2015.
But the FLIP technique stands for
First, Last, Invert and Play.
And so the basic idea behind this is
that instead of animating the width and
height of something, you animate
an element to its final position.
And then you just sort of like
a rubber band, you sort of inverse
the transition so
that you're shrinking it using transforms,
and then you're playing it so
that it transforms back to zero.
So I know that might have
been a little bit confusing,
I actually have a visual
explainer right over here.
Okay, so let's say that you have
a box that's right over here,
how do we animate it to
somewhere like over here,
especially when we don't know
exactly where it's going to be?
So we don't know how many pixels or
how far it's traveling down,
but we want to do it in a smooth way.
So the first step, and
this is the F in FLIP,
is you want to get the initial
dimensions of the elements.
Now, we could use that by
elements.getboundingclientrects,
which we'll show you in a minute.
And then secondly, you want to get
the dimensions after it changes.
So let's say that you're doing something
in JavaScript, you click a button,
something is changing, and
you need to basically change the layout.
So this isn't just x and y position but
it could also be width and height.
So, when you get the dimensions
after the change,
now you have two rectangles,
the first one and the last one.
So, now what you want to do
is you want to invert it.
So you calculate the delta,
which is this starting x in this final x,
and also the starting y and the final y,
and you're going to move that element
back to its original position.
So right now, this is actually
translated like a negative x value and
a negative y value from
its final position.
So it looks like it's in the first
position, but really it's in the last
position, but inverted so
that it's back where it originally was.
And then after that,
you just animate everything to zero.
So, I know that was a lot, but
if you look on dribble and
even on mobile apps, layout animations
are pretty much everywhere.
So, let's talk about how we could do
this with just JavaScript and CSS.
So in order to do this, we are going to be
looking at the layout animations exercise.
So I'm going to do the first
part with you, and
then hopefully you could do
the second part on your own.
So here's the layout animation
that I want us to do.
It's this little box here,
it says Animation.
And so when we click it,
it's going to get bigger and
then we're gonna have an animated text
showing up on the right hand side.
And so we could just go back and
forth between that.
And this is also using that same data
state attribute that we talked about in
the previous lesson.
So the question becomes,
how do we animate between this and that?
Because they're in two separate positions,
we can't just translate it.
This could be a completely different
layout, and actually it is.
So, over here we have a figure, and
this figure is just showing
the box over here, but
now it's a different layout where we have
some padding and we also have CSS grid.
So again, we can't just add
a translate and call it a day, we have
to figure out a way to smoothly animate
this box to be in the other position.
So, let's go ahead and do that.
We're going to be in index.html over here,
and we have a few things set up.
First we have the figure elements and
so that's going to be
this blue box over here.
We also have the caption elements which
is going to be the text over here.
That's not important right now,
that's gonna be for you to do.
And we have the app.
So we're listening for clicks on the app,
so we're not gonna use anything from that.
And all we're doing right now, is changing
the state from collapsed to expanded.
All right, so FLIP technique,
what do we do first?
So the first thing we do is we want to
capture the first rectangle of the figure.
So const first, and
I'm gonna call this firstrect =
figureEL.getBoundingClientRect().
So let's console.log,
what that firstRect is.
All right, so
when we look in the console, and
we click,
you're gonna see this DOMRect object.
So this has a few properties.
The top left, which is also x and
y or y and x respectively,
and the bottom, the height, the width.
So basically all of the dimensions of
this rectangle relative to the viewports.
So this is going to be really useful for
us.
And so I'm gonna just call this first.
And so this is the change that happens.
We have app.dataset.state, and
we're doing something over here and
now we want to capture what the rectangle
is after this change happened.
Now in order to let the documents
read paint, read layouts and
do everything, it's better to do
this in a request animation frame.
Which remember, we were talking about
those 60 frames per second in which
the browser renders things.
So if a change like adding
this collapsed attributes to
the dataset.state is happening,
then we want to make sure that the browser
has a chance to actually apply that.
So it's better to read it in the next
animation frame where we could pretty much
guarantee that that change is being made.
So we're going to then get
the second rectangle, so
const secondRect=
figureEl.getBoundingClientRect.
And let's console.log, that second one.
Okay, so we click here.
Now, we have the first one and
the second one.
And already you could tell that
the values are a little bit different,
x is 354 in the first one, and
in the second one x is 169.
So you could tell that
it moved to the left.
This is all really useful
information that we could use.
So, now what do we do now that
we have these two rectangles?
We have to find the delta between,
we'll start with x and y, so
we're gonna say const dx =
firstRect.left minus lastRect.
What did I call this, secondRect?
Let's call it lastRect.left.
And so we're going to be using this
to basically invert the position.
And so the results of this or at least
the intermediate result is we want
the last rectangle to look like
it's in the spot of the first one.
So I'm gonna console.log,
let's get that dx value.
And then we're going to be
setting a CSS variable.
So figureEL.style.setProperty.
And now,
we're going to set dx to that dx variable.
And we're going to be using that in a bit.
So bear with me.
When we click here, we had dx of 185.
And if we look at the elements, we can see
that we have that CSS variable applied.
So what's cool about this
is that we could actually
say that we want to
transform this such that
we're gonna calc that
variable times 1 pixel,
sorry if you can see that, where'd it go?
All right there this.
Okay, so now we're using that dx variable
to basically move it to its initial spot.
And so, we're doing that with CSS.
And so if we look at the styles over here,
where we're going to be adding it to here.
So let's just do the same thing over here,
so transform, translate and
we're gonna calc dx times 1 pixel.
Okay, so we click here.
Notice that this is supposed to
be in the second position but
at least as far as the x value goes,
it's still in the first position,
so we know that our dx is working.
And so now, let's do it for dy as well.
So I'm just gonna copy this dy, top,
and we're gonna set it right over here,
dy.
Okay, now we just have to
add the style for that.
So this is gonna be dy.
And so now hopefully, when we click this,
this rectangle should
look like it didn't move,
at least as far as the x and y position.
So now we clicked, it's still there.
And so basically what we do from here is,
we are going to take this,
in fact, we could do it over here.
And I am going to first add a transition,
and
this transition is going to be for
transform over, let's say, 1 second.
So watch, if I do transform: none.
Notice how it's sliding to the place
where it's supposed to be.
So the way we could do this is by
adding some more data attributes.
So you see everything is being
tied together over here.
So we have dx and we have dy, and so
we are going to add, yeah, here we go,
figureEL.dataset.flip = invert.
So we got the first rectangle, we got the
last rectangle which is the FL of FLIP.
Now, we're doing invert, and so
in the invert style,
which I'm gonna add here,
this is going to be & data-flip=invert.
We are going to be doing that transform.
So I'm just gonna move this over here.
And also, notice how we're not
doing any transition here just yet.
And that's because I want to also add
a data-flip= play and
transform that to none.
And so here's what we're
gonna do just to demonstrate.
We're gonna set a timeout and
after let's say one second,
we're gonna say that
this flip should be play.
So it's gonna change
state after one second.
So let's see what happens.
We click here, it's in the original
position and then it snaps back.
So now, if you're probably
thinking what I'm thinking,
just add a transition, and
transform, 0.3 seconds.
Now let's see what happens.
We click here, so actually we
don't really need that setTimeout.
So now,
I'm going to remove the setTimeout, but
there's a problem over here.
We have flip invert and flip play,
so this flip invert will actually
really not have an effect.
And we're gonna see it just
snap immediately to play,
which isn't really what we want.
We want some sort of a delay so that
the browser knows, okay, I'm here, and
I need to move it over here.
So we could just put this
in another animation frame.
Okay, so
now you see it moves back and forth.
But there is one missing piece, and
so that is the width and the height.
So let's just add those real quick,
const dw equals, we're going to get
basically the percentage or the ratio
of the first width and the last width.
So firstRect.width divided
by lastRect.width,
and, oops, same thing with the height.
So dh height lastRect.height.
So now we could set all these over here.
And then we have to add
a little bit of styling too.
So, now we're not just translating, but
we also have to scale it according
to the width and the height.
So this is gonna be scale[var--dw|,
var(-- dh)], okay.
That's wrong [LAUGH] That
happened the wrong way,
so let me just see what I did wrong.
So what's cool about this is
that sometimes it's just,
okay, the numbers should
be the other way around but
let me just check over here because I did
do it yeah so we have var dw, var dh.
Let's see, just checking what I did wrong,
I have this dy over here,
that's not good, it should be dh.
[LAUGH] Okay, cool.
So now when we click, you could see that
it stretches and it does everything.
And it's working pretty well.
Okay, so you might be looking at this and
thinking,
okay, why can't I use
a JavaScript library for this?
Which I mean, Greenstock sort of has
something that allows you to do this.
If you're using React, then framer motion
has this idea of layout animations, too.
And so there's a few reasons
why I want to show you this.
Not to explain that,
this is super easy to do.
Although you could just put this in
the function and then use it in your app
without having to install any libraries,
but really, it's to sort of introduce
you to request animation frame and just
doing advanced animations without fear.
So basically the combination of using
data set, just getting the bounding
client rect of the elements you and
using request animation frame.
And also using CSS variables
allow you to do a whole range of
styling which you might not have
been comfortable doing before.
Or you might have said, okay, I should
really reach out for an animation library
or reach out for this custom thing that
someone made to do my specific animation.